# Started from 1985, Now we’re Here

__Using Text Analysis To Analyze Rap Lyrics__

## Table of contents
1. List all parts of the application.	

2. Abstract

3. Narrative

  	a. Enhancing the humanities
  
  	b. Environmental scan	
  
  	c. History of the project
  
  	d. Work plan
  
  	e. Staff
  
  	f. Final product and dissemination	

## List of participants

Jagger Boussuge (Freshman year student at the University of Richmond)

Destiny Riley (Junior year student at the University of Richmond)

Tucker Shelley (Junior year student at the University of Richmond)
		
## Abstract 

Using a form of text analysis called “topic modeling,” we will analyze the change in content of Hip-Hop/Rap songs from 1985-2015. The main question we aim to answer is "How has the content of popular Hip-Hop/Rap songs changed over the past 30 years, and how do those changes in topics reflect changes in urban contemporary culture?” For this project, we will collect the lyrics from the most ten most popular Hip-Hop/Rap songs, according to the Billboard chart, from each year of 1985-2015. This will give us 900 songs through which to analyze the changes in lyrics from not only year to year, but also decade to decade. After the collection of the data, we will use the platform R and the MALLET software to make a topic model of the words and phrases that appear most in the songs. Through being able to see the most popular words and phrases in Hip-Hop/Rap throughout this thirty-year span, we can further analyze and infer which subjects have been discussed in these songs over time. Through this method, we will be able to do a kind of distant reading to view overall changes in trends in this genre from 1985-2015. 

After using the text analysis to create topic models, we will then create a website that displays the topic models from each decade and a venn diagram that compares and contrasts the subjects being discussed from decade to decade between 1985 and 2015. We plan to promote our finished product on various websites and social media platforms in hopes that it will eventually reach the academic world in areas such as class curriculum. 

## Narrative:					

### Enhancing the humanities

As a starting place for this project, we have come up with three main questions that we hope our final product will answer, or at least provide more insight on. The questions are as follows: How has the content of popular Hip-Hop/Rap songs changed over the past 30 years? How have the topics/content changed from decade to decade? How do those changes in topics reflect changes in urban contemporary culture?

In general, the humanities can be described as “the study of how people process and document the human experience” (Stanford Humanities Center). Many times in the discussion of what the concept of “humanities” entails, topics such as philosophy, literature, and language are brought up. However, music is a very important facet of the humanities that is not always discussed as much as the previously mentioned topics. Since the beginning of time, music has been one of the most prominent ways people have preserved their histories and how they have told stories about their experiences in the world and how they relate to others. Music, just as other topics in the humanities, gives us a way to “feel a sense of connection to those who have come before us, as well as to our contemporaries” (Stanford Humanities Center). 

More specifically in our discussion of music, we will be looking at the genre Hip-Hop/Rap from the year 1985 through 2015. Hip-Hop/Rap music, generally defined as a genre consisting of a stylized rhythmic music that commonly accompanies rapping, a rhythmic and rhyming speech that is chanted, was started in South Bronx, New York by inner-city African-Americans in the 1970s. Hip hop and rap will be used interchangeably throughout the rest of this proposal. Though rap gained popularity in the late 1970s with the success of hip hop group Sugarhill Gang’s 1979 song “Rapper’s Delight,” the genre’s popularity sparked in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the success of groups such as Run D.M.C. and N.W.A. More specifically, in June of 1991, Billboard announced the album Niggaz4life by notorious rap group N.W.A. took the #1 position on the Billboard 200 chart. This chart ranks the 200 most popular albums in the United States on a weekly basis. Though the chart had been in existence for over 45 years, June of 1991 marked the first time that a rap group took the #1 position on the chart.
Since this milestone by rap group N.W.A. occurred in 1991, hip hop has become one of the most prominent genres of music and has influenced society and contemporary culture for decades. In terms of culture, hip hop originated as a cohesive social force by taking a stand against racial inequalities and other forms of socioeconomic oppression. Some facets of early hip hop culture include MC-ing/rapping, graffiti arts, DJ-ing and a style of dance referred to as b-boying. These characteristics of hip hop challenged the dominant culture present in society and existed as a way for young African American and Latino teenagers and young adults in the Bronx to express themselves. As hip hop progressed throughout the following decades after its origin, it continued to act as a way to counter dominant culture in mainstream media and society as well as a form of self-expression. In the decades since then up to now, hip hop has become a global language due to its ability to speak “both to and through youth, creating a cultural free space” where they can “become themselves by fashioning their languages, styles, attitudes, and both physical and political stances in ways that often challenge dominant cultures” (Alim, 2007). As it is clear rap has had an immense impact on contemporary culture since its origin, it is important to see what types of impact it has made over the decades. Culture is a major part of the humanities, making this study of the changes in hip hop a necessary one. 

Though music, specifically hip hop, may be viewed as a specific facet or concept of humanities, it is actually influenced and influences other areas of the humanities. It relates to other areas studies within the humanities, such as History, Media Studies, American Studies, and Cultural Studies. This makes this topic of the change in hip hop and its influence on culture applicable to those who are and may not be actually interested in the hip hop genre itself. For scholars and students, this project could provide more insight into how hip hop, or music in general, influences the topics that they spend much time researching. Also, for students, this project could help one go more in-depth into what they are learning in class to see how hip hop has influenced the culture or area of study they are looking at, or how the culture or area of study they are looking at may have influenced hip hop. This project could also be relatable and used by a general audience. Music has always existed as a universal concept. Hip hop has become quite a universal genre of music and, as previously stated, has been influenced by various cultures and influences countless cultures. While everyone may not be passionate about music, everyone has been exposed to music and most likely experiences some form of hip hop on a regular basis, whether they realize it or not. Because of this, it is important for even a general audience to see how hip hop has influenced contemporary culture as it has changed over time. 
As we have already developed questions we aim to answer with this research project, we have also come up with specific tasks that need to be completed in order for this project to be done efficiently and for it to have worthwhile deliverables at its conclusion. We are primarily using Billboard charts as the content through which we will measure the success or popularity of the rap songs we will look at for this project. For our corpus, or the complete collection of data we will need for this project, we plan to look at the top 30 rap songs per year, starting with 1985, through 2015. This will provide us with 300 songs per decade, as we plan to look at changes in the content of rap music from decade to decade as well, for a complete corpus of a total of 900 songs from 1985-2015. 

For this project, we will be using two main digital humanities methods: text analysis and distant reading. In terms of text analysis, it can be used to “quickly search through a large corpus, to generate word clouds or find word frequency, to more complex tasks like identifying patterns in parts of speech or identifying sentiments, moods, and emotions in a corpus” (University of Michigan Library). We plan to use text analysis to analyze the numerous themes and trends present in our corpus of song lyrics. We will be able to see what words and phrases are used most frequently from year to year and decade to decade. We will also be able to see what words are used with other words to develop certain meanings, which are called “topics.” With this text analysis, we will be building topic models for each decade (1985-1995, 1995-2005, 2005-2015). A topic model is a visual diagram that shows different topics present and recurring in a corpus. Topic modeling is a way of identifying patterns in a specific corpus. We will run our corpus through a platform called R and then a software which will then group the words into topics to produce a visual topic model. The software that we will be using is MALLET. This software is useful for activities such as language processing, document classification, clustering, topic modeling, information extraction. We will run our corpus through this software and it will create the topic models. We felt this would be the best way to display the main questions we are trying to answer in our research project. Our topic model will be similar to the one linked above. However, we will be doing one for each decade so that we can have an accurate amount of data to further analyze changes in lyrical content from decade to decade. 

Through the topic models, we can begin to do a “distant reading” of the trends in themes present in the corpus. Literary scholar Franco Moretti defines distant reading as “understanding literature not by studying particular texts, but by aggregating and analyzing massive amounts of data” (Schulz, 2011). In this case, the data or “literature” being analyzed is the lyrics from the top rap songs from 1985-2015. We are “aggregating” or collecting the lyrics of 900 songs and then analyzing them from what We do not think that close readings, or close analysis, of these lyrics are irrelevant. Rather, we believe that this distant reading provides us a better method to discover what we are trying to see, which is content and cultural changes related to hip hop over time. Because we are attempting to look at these lyrical and cultural changes over time, we strongly believe that it makes more sense to do distant reading as opposed to close reading. It is more time efficient and, hopefully, provides us with a more overall view of what we are trying to observe and analyze. Also, we plan to not have too much of a broad view of lyrics over a 30-year span, as we plan to use this distant reading method in conjunction with close readings of hip hop lyrics in our final product, which we will be discussing later in this grant.

As this is a Level I grant proposal, we are requesting $15,000 to complete this project. Collecting the information for our corpus will most likely be the least expensive part of this project. We expect that the most expensive part of this project will be paying for the activities after creating the topic models. Along with the topic models, we also plan on making a venn diagram to compare and contrast the lyrical, and thus cultural, themes of the decades. We hope for them to be featured on various forms of media so that these changes in lyrics and culture can gain exposure. We plan to use the money towards funding our website, paying to be featured on other websites, and hopefully for promotion to be featured in other elements of learning, such as class curriculum and websites at various colleges and universities. As I previously stated, we plan to create a website dedicated to the project when it has been completed. This website will be regularly updated and promoted on numerous social media platforms. 

We hope that our topic models, venn diagram, and our website will mark the start of a new trend of discussing how changes in lyrical content influence culture and vice versa. We also hope to influence others who are passionate about hip hop, and music in general, to take on projects such as this one to continue this important discussion. We want this project to reach as many people as possible, even people, or artists, who may work in the music or media industry. We know that this project will not be the end of this discussion, as it also not the start. However, we hope to continue this discussion and provide a new perspective on not only the changes in hip hop, but also how it impacts our lives on a regular basis.

#### References

Alim, Samy H. (2007, January 23). How Hip-Hop Culture Is Changing the Wor(l)d. Retrieved from 
http://newsroom.ucla.edu.
Defining the Humanities. N.d. Retrieved from http://shc.stanford.edu.
Digital Humanities. N.d. Retrieved from http://guides.lib.umich.edu.
Schulz, Kathryn. (2011, June 24). What Is Distant Reading? Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com.



										
### Environmental scan 	

Two similar existing projects which helped influence this project are the website Rap Genius and Vox’s television series “Earworm,” which creates rap analysis videos. Both are very popular among youth culture online and have accumulated millions of views. Rap Genius specifically looks at certain songs and analyzes the lyrics, looking at individual phrases in those songs, giving them context and translating what the artist may have originally intended to mean. It even allows artists to edit their own analysis of their songs that fans may have done, giving the artist a special check next to their names to represent the authenticity of the annotation of the lyric. Rap Genius started mainly as a website that simply showed a song’s lyrics, highlighting certain phrases or lines in the lyrics that were then annotated. Now, however, it has grown into a much bigger enterprise, as it now also produces videos and interviews artists about the meanings behind their song lyrics. 

Vox on the other hand is  “a general interest news site for the 21st century” that created a tv series called “Earworm.” Earworm can be accessed on Youtube, and is comprised of different episodes revolving around the composition of music, specifically rap and hip hop. In these videos, Vox looks at specific trends in rap songs, such as flow, rhyme and common phrases or obscure topics many rap songs have in common. This is very different from Rap Genius, as Vox analyzes multiple different songs as a whole instead of individual songs. Rap Genius does a close reading of the text rather than a distant reading as Vox does, in order to see a specific trend. 

While we have been inspired by the work of platforms such as Rap Genius and Vox, the plan and outcomes we have developed for our project are certainly much different. The way in which our project is different is that it combines both existing projects in a sense. Similar to Vox, we use distant as we look at a large corpus made up of numerous songs, while also doing a close reading alike that of Rap Genius in order to analyze the specific themes in rap music. In addition, our project is different as instead of creating videos to entertain viewers, we are using a mixture of softwares to answer specific humanities questions. Not only are we answering humanities questions, but we are also working with various humanities and rap scholars. We are explicitly looking to analyze rap music over a time perdiof of three decades and, more importantly, how Rap music reflects societal change in culture over time. In other words, we are using topic models, venn diagrams, and a website, all through which we will look at how changes in rap’s lyrical content over time has influenced contemporary culture. Our project will also be different from those we previously mentioned as it is, hopefully, not only be accessed by hip hop fans online, but also by professors, college students, humanities scholars, music industry professionals, etc. 

  							 								
### History of the project 

We spent a lot of class time talking about topic modeling and text analysis, both close readings and distant readings. We started analyzing corpuses when we were looking at President speeches from President George Washington to President Barack Obama. In that project we used Voyant as a tool. Later we studied topic model on a website called Signs@40 and saw how one can create a visualization of occuring themes from a corpus of different sources in an attempt to show ongoing trends. We also learned how to use mallet in order to themes within academic journals.

Unfortunately, this is a very new project and we do not have any previous financial support or publications produced. However we have research facilities available here at the University of Richmond. We have looked at works of hip hop scholars such as Tricia Rose and Jeff Chang for insight and inspiration for this project. We are fortunate enough to now have them on our staff for this project. We have not had any testing or evaluation yet, but are eager to begin. 
 							
							 								
### Work plan 

The first section of our work on this grant will be focused on the creation of the topic model visualizations. This involves the collection of the corpus and the running of R and MALLET. Since MALLET takes only a couple of minutes, most of our effort on the first part of this project will be in collecting and organizing our corpus. As stated earlier, our corpus will consist of 900 songs, 300 songs from each decade, 30 from each year. To clarify, these are the top 30 songs on the Hot 100 year end chart from Billboard. Creating the corpus will require us to get all of these song lyrics in one place. This means we have to copy and paste the lyrics of each song from Rap Genius, or a similar website onto a text file, then create a folder with all of those text files of songs. At the end of this, we will have three folders of corpuses to work with. Considering this will be a summer research project over the course of about three months, this first section should take about a month. We will surely have some issues to work out with assembling the corpus in the right format. This is why we are giving ourselves a month to create this, even though it may not appear to be that much work. We will need assistance from Dr. Tilton, Ted Underwood, and Andrew Goldstone to properly format our corpus and to run MALLET without issues, as none of us are well versed with coding.

The second part of our project will be focused on analyzing our results. This will involve a lot of research and, obviously, analysis. What we will be doing here is drawing connections between lyrics (topics) of the decades and the events and cultures that they were born from. Cross referencing and conclusions will be abundant during this section of work. We plan on taking another month to be diligent and thorough in our analysis. For this section we will be utilizing the expertise of both Tricia Rose and Jeff Chang, who have both written books about changes in hip hop and the culture surrounding it.

The last month of the project will be about trying to get word out about our results and findings. We will create a website including our topic model results and the resulting conclusions made from those and our research. This last month will be focused on promoting the website and getting the website and our findings featured on as many public platforms as possible. 
						

### Staff					

For this research project, we will have a staff off five people, not including ourselves. Our Project Director will be Dr. Lauren Tilton. As a digital humanities scholar and professor at the University of Richmond, she has years of experience with topic modeling, which is one of the main aspects of this project. She has used R and MALLET for various projects, which will also be very useful to this project as we are also using them. Her general knowledge about hip hop will also be very helpful as we work on this project. Her main responsibilities during the first part of the project will be to check the accuracy of our use of R and MALLET, and then to make sure that the topic modeling is executed correctly. After this part of the project is complete, she will help us in our creation of the website as well as promotion of this project and the website so that we can reach more people. Throughout this entire project, she will keep in contact with our other staff members to make sure our project is on the right track and that our information is accurate. For the first half of the project, she will dedicate approximately 5-7 hours per week to this project. For the second part, after the topic models have been completed, she will dedicate approximately 15-20 hours per week to the project. 

In terms of topic modeling, the two staff members that will assist us the most with this part of our project are digital humanities scholars Andrew Goldstone & Ted Underwood. As they are experts in topic modeling, they will be integral staff members during the first part of our project as we build the topic models from our corpus of 900 songs. They will oversee us as we build the topic models and also as we analyze the themes and patterns we see from the topic models to make sure that our methods analysis is accurate. They will dedicate approximately 5 hours per week to overseeing the topic modeling part of the project.

For the hip-hop aspect of our project, we will heavily rely on hip-hop scholars Tricia Rose & Jeff Chang. Tricia Rose has written books such as The Hip Hop Wars which discuss themes and changes in hip hop. Jeff Chang has written books such as Can’t Stop Won’t Stop which discuss the origins of hip hop and the impact that hip-hop has had on not only culture and society in America, but also internationally. These two scholars will assist us in our collection of accurate corpus, as well as in our subsequent analysis of the changes of content and themes in hip-hop from 1985-2015. They will dedicate approximately 8-10 hours per week to this project. 
						
### Final product and dissemination	

As stated before, our final product will be the topic model we create and a website accompanying it that describes our results and added analysis. Our last month is going to be focused on working to get this website published and promoted on as many public forums as possible. Our analysis on this will be an essay written in markdown and will be a file on GitHub. We will be sharing the link to our article with as many digital media forums as we can. This begins with things as small as quick articles in the University of Richmond’s online newspaper The Collegian. Other forums we are going to reach out to are local rap radio stations. A link will also be sent out through all of our social media accounts, which will generate a lot of interest. Our main goal is to have this get published or, better yet, have a video about our project made by Vox or Genius. These are the two most established media platforms for contemporary rap music. We would also like to set up a booth at Complexcon, a convention for arts, food, music and more, on November 5-6. This is a great way to get our findings out to a big crowd of people that have a similar interest in rap music. Opening up an interactive booth is also a way to reach out to those without the ability to see or read. We will also be recording a reading of our finals in a narrative style for those same people. 
